The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jealousy of le Barbouille, by
Jean Baptiste Poquelin de Moliere

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Jealousy of le Barbouille
       (La Jalousie du Barbouille)

Author: Jean Baptiste Poquelin de Moliere

Translator: Charles Heron Wall

Release Date: October 28, 2008 [EBook #27074]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JEALOUSY OF LE BARBOUILLE ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau








THE JEALOUSY OF LE BARBOUILLE.

(LA JALOUSIE DU BARBOUILLE.)


Among the small farces said to have been sketched by Moliere during
his stay in the provinces, two only which seem genuine have come down
to us, and have been published for the last thirty years with his
comedies. These are, 'La Jalousie du Barbouille,' and 'Le Medecin
Volant.' Moliere has made use of the former in the third act of the
comedy called 'George Dandin.'

Moliere acted the part of Le Barbouille.




PERSONS REPRESENTED.

LE BARBOUILLE, _husband to_ ANGELIQUE.
THE DOCTOR.
ANGELIQUE.
VALERE, _lover to_ ANGELIQUE.
CATHAU, _maid to_ ANGELIQUE.
GORGIBUS, _father to_ ANGELIQUE.
VILLEBREQUIN.
LA VALLEE.




THE JEALOUSY OF LE BARBOUILLE.


SCENE I.--LE BARBOUILLE.

BAR. Everybody must acknowledge that I am the most unfortunate of men!
I have a wife who plagues me to death; and who, instead of bringing me
comfort and doing things as I like them to be done, makes me swear at
her twenty times a day. Instead of keeping at home, she likes gadding
about, eating good dinners, and passing her time with people of I
don't know what description. Ah! poor Barbouille, how much you are to
be pitied! But she must be punished. Suppose you killed her?... It
would do no good, for you would be hung afterwards. If you were to
have her sent to prison?... The minx would find means of coming out.
What the deuce are you to do?--But here is the doctor coming out this
way; suppose I ask his advice on my difficulties.


SCENE II.--DOCTOR, LE BARBOUILLE.

BAR. I was going to fetch you, to beg for your opinion on a question
of great importance to me.

DOC. You must be very ill-bred, very loutish, and very badly taught,
my friend, to speak to me in that fashion, without first taking off
your hat, without observing _rationem loci, temporis et personae_.
What! you begin by an abrupt speech, instead of saying _Salve_, vel
_salvus sis, doctor doctorum eruditissime_. What do you take me for,
eh?

BAR. Really, doctor, I am very sorry; the fact is that I am almost
beside myself, and did not think of what I was doing; but I know you
are a gallant man.

DOC. Do you know what _gallant man_ comes from?

BAR. It matters little to me whether it comes from Villejuif or
Aubervilliers.

DOC. Know that the word _gallant man_ comes from _elegant_. By taking
the _g_ and the _a_ of the last syllable, that makes _ga_; then by
taking the two _ll_'s, adding _a_ and the two last letters _nt_, that
makes _gallant_; then by adding _man_ you have _gallant man_. But to
come back to what I said; What do you take me for?

BAR. I take you for a doctor. But let us speak a little of what I have
to propose to you. You must know that ...

DOC. Let me tell you first that I am not only a doctor, but that I am
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and ten times
doctor. Firstly, number one is the base, the foundation, and the first
of all numbers; so am I the first of all doctors, the most learned of
the learned. Secondly, there are two faculties essential for a perfect
knowledge of things: the sense and the understanding; I am all sense,
all understanding: ergo, I am twice doctor.

BAR. Agreed. What I want ...

DOC. Thirdly, according to Aristotle, the number three is that of
perfection; I am perfect; and every thing I do is perfect: ergo, I am
three times doctor.

BAR. Very well then, doctor....

DOC. Fourthly, philosophy is divided into four parts, logic, morals,
physics, and metaphysics; I possess all four, and know them perfectly:
ergo, I am four times doctor.

BAR. Deuce take it, I don't doubt it. Listen to me then.

DOC. Fifthly, there are five universals: the genus, the species, the
differentia, the property, and the accident, without knowing which it
is impossible to arrive at any satisfactory conclusions; I make great
use of them, and know how important they are; ergo, I am five times
doctor.

BAR. I must have patience.

DOC. Sixthly, number six is the number of work; I work incessantly for
my own glory; ergo, I am six times doctor.

BAR. Well, well, speak as long as you like.

DOC. Seventhly, the number seven is the number of bliss; I possess a
perfect knowledge of all that can produce happiness, and by my talents
am happy myself. I am therefore forced to say of myself: _O ter
quaterque beatum!_ Eighthly, the number eight is the number of
justice, on account of the equality which is found in it; the justice
and prudence with which I measure and weigh all my actions make me
eight times doctor. Ninthly, there are nine Muses, and I am equally
the favourite of them all. Tenthly, one cannot pass number ten without
repeating all the other numbers, and it is the universal number.
Similarly, when people have found me, they have found the universal
doctor; and I am in myself all the other doctors together. Thus, with
the help of these plausible, true, demonstrative, and convincing
reasons, you see that I am one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten times doctor.

BAR. What the deuce does he mean by all this? I thought I had found a
clever man who would give me good advice, and I find a chimney-sweep,
who, instead of speaking to me, plays at mora.[1] One, two, three,
four--ha! ha!--ha! ha! Come, come, that's not it; you must listen to
me, and remember that I am not a man to make you lose your time; I
shall make it worth your while, and if you can satisfy me in what I
want of you, I will give you what you wish--money, if you like.

DOC. Ha! money?

BAR. Yes, money; and whatever you may ask besides.

DOC. (_sharply, tucking up his gown behind him_). Then you take me for
a man who would do anything for money, for a man fond of money, for a
mercenary soul? Know, my friend, that if you were to give me a purse
full of gold, and that this purse were in a rich box, this box in a
precious case, this case in a superb chest, this chest in a rare
museum, this museum in a magnificent apartment, this apartment in a
gorgeous castle, this castle in a wonderful citadel, this citadel in a
celebrated town, this town in a fertile island, this island in an
opulent province, this province in a flourishing monarchy, this
monarchy in the whole world;[2] that if you gave me the world in which
this flourishing monarchy would be, in which this opulent province
would be, in which this fertile island would be, in which this
celebrated town would be, in which this wonderful citadel would be, in
which this gorgeous castle would be, in which this pleasant apartment
would be, in which this rare museum would be, in which this wonderful
chest would be, in which this precious case would be, in which this
rich box would be, in which the purse full of gold would be, I should
care no more for it than this (_snaps his fingers and exit_).

BAR. Well. I made a mistake. Seeing him dressed as a doctor, I felt
that of necessity I must speak of money to him; but since he does not
want any, nothing can be more easy than to satisfy him. I'll run after
him. (_Runs out._)


SCENE III.--ANGELIQUE, VALERE, CATHAU.

ANG. I assure you, sir, that you will oblige me very much by coming to
see me sometimes: my husband is so ugly, so ill-behaved, and such a
drunkard, that it is perfect martyrdom for me to be with him, and I
ask you what pleasure one can have with such a clown as he is?

VAL. You do me too much honour. I promise you I shall do my utmost to
amuse you, and since you are kind enough to say that my company is not
unpleasant, my care and attentions shall prove to you what pleasure
this good news gives me.

CAT. Ay! quick, talk of something else; here's our old bugbear coming.


SCENE IV.--LE BARBOUILLE, VALERE, ANGELIQUE, CATHAU.

VAL. Mademoiselle,[3] I am very sorry to bring you such bad news, but,
you would have heard it from some one else, and since your brother is
ill ...

ANG. Ah! say no more, sir, I am your servant, and thank you very much
for the trouble you have taken.

(_Exit_ VALERE.)

BAR. Well! what need is there of my having a certificate of my
cuckledom from the notary? So! so! you trollop! I find you with a man
in spite of all my remonstrances, and you want to send me from Gemini
to Capricornus.

ANG. Are you going to scold me for that? This gentleman only just came
to tell me of my brother's serious illness: why should you make that a
subject of quarrel?

CAT. Ah, directly I saw him, I wondered if we should be long in peace.

BAR. You spoil one another, you women; you, Cathau, you corrupt my
wife; she is not half as good now as she was before she had you to
wait upon her.

CAT. Really you treat me in a nice manner.

ANG. Leave the drunkard alone; don't you see that he is so muddled
that he does not even know what he says.


SCENE V.--GORGIBUS, VILLEBREQUIN, ANGELIQUE, CATHAU, LE BARBOUILLE.

GOR. Now, there's my cursed son-in-law scolding my daughter again!

VILL. We must see what is the matter.

GOR. What! will you always be quarrelling! Will you never have peace
at home?

BAR. This hussy calls me drunkard. (_to_ ANGELIQUE) Here, I have a
great mind to give you a good dressing[4] before your relations.

GOR. May the dev ... may his money be blessed, if you have done as he
says.[5]

ANG. It is always he who begins to ...

CAT. Cursed be the hour when you chose that sordid wretch!


SCENE VI.--GORGIBUS, VILLEBREQUIN, ANGELIQUE, CATHAU, LE BARBOUILLE,
DOCTOR.

DOC. Why, what is the meaning of this? what a disorder! what a
quarrel! what a racket! what a row! what a noise! what a dispute! what
a combustion! What is the matter, gentlemen? what is the matter? what
is the matter? Come, come, is there no way of making you agree, let me
be your pacificator; suffer me to bring peace among you.

GOR. It is my son-in-law and my daughter who have had words together.

DOC. But what can it be? Now, come, let me know the cause of their
dispute.

GOR. Sir ...

DOC. But in a few words ...

GOR. Yes, yes; but put on your hat.

DOC. Hat; that is bonnet. Do you know what bonnet comes from?

GOR. No.

DOC. It comes from _bonum est, it is good, a thing which is good_,
because it saves one from colds and coughs.

GOR. Indeed! I did not know that.

DOC. Now quick, the subject of your quarrel?

GOR. This is what happened.

DOC. I hope you are not a man to keep me long when I pray you not to
do so. I have some pressing business which calls me to town; still, if
I can bring peace to your family, I am willing to stop a moment.

GOR. I shall soon have done.

DOC. Be quick, then.

GOR. It will be said in a moment.

DOC. We must acknowledge, Mr. Gorgibus, that it is a wonderful gift to
be able to say things in a few words, and that great talkers, instead
of being heard, become often so wearisome that one cannot listen to
them; _virtutem primam esse puta compescere linguam._ Yes, the best
quality of an honest man is silence.

GOR. You must know then ...

DOC. There are three things which Socrates used to recommend
particularly to his disciples: to be careful of one's actions, to be
sober in eating, and to say things in a few words. Begin, Mr.
Gorgibus.

GOR. It is my wish to do so.

DOC. In a few words, without ceremony, without indulging in a long
speech: cut it short with an apophthegm;[6] quick, quick, Mr.
Gorgibus, make haste, avoid prolixity.

GOR. Suffer me to speak then....

DOC. That's enough Mr. Gorgibus, you speak too much. Somebody else
must tell me what was the cause of their quarrel.

VILL. You must know, sir, that ...

DOC. You are an ignoramus, an unlearned man, ignorant of all good
rules; an ass, in plain English. What! you begin a discourse without a
word of exordium! Some one else must tell me what happened; will you,
young lady, tell me the particulars of all this noise?

ANG. Do you see here my fat rascal, my wine-barrel of a husband ...

DOC. Gently, if you please, speak with respect of your husband when
you are under the nose of a doctor like me.

ANG. Ah! I should just think so, doctor! I care little for you or your
doctrine, and I am a doctor whenever I please.

DOC. You, a doctor when you please. A nice doctor you make. You seem
to me to do much as you wish.... But, I say, tell me the subject of
your uproar.

BAR. Sir, your honour ...

DOC. You begin well. "Your honour!" this word has something flattering
to the ear, something full of magniloquence; "your honour!"

BAR. According to my will.

DOC. Quite right.... "According to my will!" the will speaks of a
wish, the wish presupposes means to come to one's ends, and the end
presupposes an object. It is well said, "according to my will!"

BAR. I am bursting with rage.

DOC. Cut out this word "bursting." It is a low, vulgar expression.

BAR. But, doctor, listen to me for mercy's sake.

DOC. _Audi, quaeso_, would Caesar have said.[7]

BAR. Seize her, or don't seize her, you will listen to me or I will
break your doctoral neck! What the devil do you mean by all this?

    (LE BARBOUILLE, ANGELIQUE, GORGIBUS, CATHAU, VILLEBREQUIN, _wish
    to explain the cause of the quarrel; the_ DOCTOR _explains that
    peace is a fine thing. They all talk together, and make a dreadful
    noise. In the midst of all this_, LE BARBOUILLE _ties the_ DOCTOR
    _by the legs with a rope, throws him down on his back, and drags
    him away; the_ DOCTOR _goes on talking all the time, and counts
    all his arguments on his fingers, as if he were not on the
    ground._)

GOR. Now, my daughter, go back to your home and live in peace with
your husband.

VILL. Your servant; good night.

(_Exeunt_ VILLEBREQUIN, GORGIBUS, _and_ ANGELIQUE.)


SCENE VII.--VALERE, LA VALLEE.

VAL. I am extremely obliged to you, sir, for the trouble you have
taken, and I promise you that in about an hour's time I shall be at
the place of rendezvous you give me.

LA VAL. It cannot be put off so long, in a quarter of an hour the ball
will be over, and you will miss the pleasure of meeting there the
person you love.

VAL. Let us go together then.

(_Exeunt_ VALERE _and_ LA VALLEE.)


SCENE VIII.--ANGELIQUE (_alone_).

While my husband is absent, I will just go round to a ball given by
one of our neighbours. I shall be back before him, for he is somewhere
drinking; he will not even know that I am gone out. The wretched knave
always leaves me alone at home, as if I were his dog. (_Exit_ ANGELIQUE.)


SCENE IX.--LE BARBOUILLE.

I knew that I should master that brute of a doctor and his stupid
doctrine. Devil take the ignorant ass! I soon brought all his science
to the ground. I must now go and see if our good wife has prepared
anything for my supper. (_Exit._)


SCENE X.--ANGELIQUE.

How unlucky! I went too late, the party was over. I arrived just as
everybody was leaving. But never mind, it shall be for another time. I
will go home as if nothing was the matter. Bless me! the door is
locked; Cathau! Cathau!


SCENE XI.--LE BARBOUILLE (_at the window_), ANGELIQUE.

BAR. "Cathau! Cathau!" Well! what is the matter with Cathau? And where
do you come from at this time of night, and in such weather?

ANG. Where I come from? Just open the door, and I will tell you.

BAR. Yes, you catch me! You may go and sleep where you come from; I
shall not open to a gad-about like you. What! alone at this time of
night! I don't know if it is fancy, but my forehead seems to me
already rougher by half.

ANG. Well, what do you mean by scolding me because I am alone? You
scold me if I have anybody near me; what am I to do?

BAR. Stop at home, give orders for the supper, take care of the
household, and of the children; but it is no use talking so much;
good-bye, good night, go to the devil and leave me in peace.

ANG. You won't open to me?

BAR. No. I shall not open to you.

ANG. Ah! my dear little husband, I beg of you open the door; do, my
darling little heart.

BAR. Ah! crocodile! Ah! dangerous serpent! you caress me to betray me.

ANG. Open, do open.

BAR. Farewell! _Vade retro, Satanas!_

ANG. What, you won't open.

BAR. No!

ANG. You have no pity for the wife who loves you so much?

BAR. No, I am inflexible. You have offended me, I am revengeful like
the very devil! that is to say plainly that I am inexorable.

ANG. Do you know that if you push me too far, and put me in a passion,
I may do something which will make you repent your unkindness.

BAR. And what will you do, dear little vixen?

ANG. I declare that if you do not open to me, I will kill myself
before the door; my parents will no doubt come here before going to
bed, to see if we are all right together, and they will find me dead,
and you will be hanged.

BAR. Ha! ha! ha! ha! the silly creature! Tell me who would lose the
most? Nonsense, you are not so foolish as to play such a trick.

ANG. You don't believe me. See, here is my knife all ready, if you do
not open at once I will pierce myself to the heart with it.

BAR. Take care, it is very sharp.

ANG. You won't open to me?

BAR. I have told you twenty times that I shall not open; kill
yourself, die, go to the devil, I care not.

ANG. (_pretending to stab herself_). Farewell then.... Ay! I am dead.

BAR. Can she be stupid enough to do such a thing? I must go down with
the light and see.

ANG. (_aside_). I will pay you back. If I can only slip into the house
while you are looking for me, it shall be my turn. (_She runs past_
BARBOUILLE, _and manages to get into the house without his knowledge._)

BAR. Well! I knew she was not so stupid as all that! She is dead, and
yet she runs like Pacolet's horse.[8] To say the truth, she really
frightened me, she did right to run away, for if I had found her alive
after she had given me such a fright, my boot would have taught her
not to play the fool. I must go to bed now. Hallo! the wind must have
shut the door to, I fear. Hi! Cathau, Cathau, open the door.

ANG. (_at the window_). "Cathau, Cathau! well what is the matter with
Cathau?" and where do you come from, you drunkard? Well, well, my
parents will soon be here, and will hear all about you. You wine-tap,
you infamous wretch, you do not stir from the public-house; but leave
a poor wife with little children waiting for you all day at home
without caring to know if they want anything.

BAR. Open quickly, she-devil! or I'll break your head open.


SCENE XII.--GORGIBUS, VILLEBREQUIN, ANGELIQUE, LE BARBOUILLE.

GOR. Why, what is it now? still quarrelling and fighting?

VILL. What? will you never agree?

ANG. Only just look at him! he is drunk, and returns at this time of
night to make a noise and threaten to kill me.

GOR. She is right: it is not at this hour of night you should come
home. Why can you not, like a good father of a family, come home early
and live at peace with your wife?

BAR. Deuce take me, if I left the house! Ask those gentlemen who are
on the terrace there. It is she who has only just come home. Ah! how
innocence is always oppressed!

GOR. Well! Come, come, try to agree together, and ask her to forgive
you.

BAR. I ask her to forgive me! I had rather the devil flew off with
her. I am in such a terrible rage, I hardly know what to do.

GOR. Come, daughter, kiss your husband, and be friends.


SCENE XIII.--THE DOCTOR (_in night-gear at another window_).

DOC. What! always noise, disorder, dissension, quarrels, strife,
disputes, uproar, everlasting altercations? What is it? What can it
be? One can have no rest.

VILL. It is nothing, Mr. Doctor, every one is agreed.

DOC. Ah! about being agreed, shall I read you a chapter of Aristotle,
where he proves that all the different parts of the universe subsist
only through the concord which exists between them?

VILL. Will it be long?

DOC. No, it's not a bit long, only about sixty or eighty pages.

VILL. Thanks, good night, good night!

GOR. It is not necessary.

DOC. Do you wish for it?

GOR. No.

DOC. Good night, then, since it is so--_latine, bona nox_.

VILL. Let us all go and have some supper together.




FOOTNOTES

 [1] An Italian game (Latin, _micare digitis_), in which one player
 suddenly raises the hand of which some fingers are shut, and some are
 open. The other players have to guess the number of fingers raised.

 [2] In most editions we find "_et que tout le monde ou serait cette
 monarchie florissante_," which has no meaning. The correct reading is
 "_et que tu me donnerais le monde ou serait_," &c.

 [3] See 'Impromptu de Versailles,' Sc. i.

 [4] _Je suis bien tente de te bailler une quinte major._ Quinte major is
 a term of piquet. It is here employed figuratively. Compare its use
 in 'Les Facheux,' Act ii. Sc. ii.

 [5] This seems to be the meaning of "_Je dedonne au diable l'escarcelle,
 si vous l'aviez fait._" _Je dedonne au diable_ is apparently a euphemism
 for _Je donne au diable._ In French, compare _parbleu, corbleu_, &c., and
 _deuce, zounds, egad_, &c., in English. _Dedonne_ is not given by Littre.
 It occurs again in 'Le Medecin Volant,' Sc. x., but does not seem to
 have been employed elsewhere by Moliere.

 [6] Compare Sc. iv. 'Le Mariage Force.'

 [7] DOC. 'Audi, quaeso,' aurait dit Ciceron.

     BAR. Si ce rompt, si ce brise, &c.

 It seems necessary to ascribe the saying to Caesar, rather than to
 Cicero, in order to render to some extent this fearful pun.

 [8] An enchanted dwarf in the old romance of 'Valentine and Orson,'
 who manufactured a wooden horse, which could go very fast "_Courir
 comme le cheval de Pacolet,_" remains as a proverb.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jealousy of le Barbouille, by
Jean Baptiste Poquelin de Moliere

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JEALOUSY OF LE BARBOUILLE ***

***** This file should be named 27074.txt or 27074.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/7/27074/

Produced by Delphine Lettau

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
